# Reddit: Key West, United States

Sources: /r/KeyWest

## Two Stories about the Dry Tortugas (Journey Account, early April)

The Dry Tortugas (the name of which comes apparently from having 1) no fresh water, 2) but lots of yummy sea turtles) is a 19th century fort out at the end of the Florida Keys.  In a world of sailing ships, it had a number of virtues (besides the yummy turtles).  It sits at intersection of shipping lanes coming out of and into the Mississippi River and the beginning of the Gulf Stream.  It has a deep water harbor protected from storms coming up from the south.  A fort there thus offered a large amount of control over the coming and going of ships, both commercial and military.

The challenge of building such a fort, however, was enormous.  The islands are 70 miles west of Key West, have no fresh water, and the highest point is 16 feet above sea level.  There are no raw materials to build the fortress walls.  Everything had to come in by ship:  16 million bricks, heavy foundation stones, cannon, laborers, food, and water.  The result was -- when the  United States built Fort Jefferson -- it took them so long that it was obsolete by the time it opened.  Started in the 1840s and finished after the Civil War, the fort never fired its guns in anger.  Its brick walls, designed to fend off solid shot, would never have been able to withstand explosive shells.  It had a garrison only for a few years after completion, with the military giving up on it in 1874.  It was mostly neglected after that, used briefly during the Spanish-American War and World War I.  It finally became a national park in the 1990s and is now one of the most remote.

Visiting it is really two stories.  There’s the getting there and the being there.  I took the ferry out, a 2.5 hour ride each way.  There’s a seaplane option as well for those of us who have large amounts of money.  The ferry leaves at 8 am, which means an early start.  I had read warnings about potential sea-sickness so I came well-fortified with Dramamine.  That seemed like a good plan from the beginning as the crew member (They all had great names.  His was “Hollywood.”  There was a “Lando,” a “Jack,” and a “Cap’n Mike”) briefing us repeatedly mentioned the issue, and promised that they had a massive supply of “gift bags,” as he put it, should we desire to throw up.  They also had Dramamine for $1 a dose.

The warnings were not incorrect.  The movement of the ferry was not too bad at first as we moved through waters sheltered by the barrier reef.  But once we shifted into the open channel, we started rocking front to back, side to side pretty vigorously, with the occasional crab-wise shudder as a wave hit at an angle.  It was an impressive amount of rocking and rolling.  The crew was completely unaffected.  The passengers, however, started turning fascinating shades of white and green and the gift bags were liberally utilized.  To my shock and consternation (and the same to anyone who knows that I can get motion sick turning my head too quickly), I was not one of them.  The drugs plus a strategically chosen seat on the back deck staring firmly out on the ocean kept me just below the nausea level.  I could feel it if I looked inboard but otherwise I was fine.

We got there in late morning and the passengers stumbled off and headed to the nearest dry land.  Being at the fort is an overwhelming experience.  The sun is intense, blindingly reflected off deeply green water, and without much shade from the scrub trees.  The island is small and the fort is immense, dominating the entire Key.  The fort walls are relatively low (three stories) but enormously thick, and surround nearly 16 acres of land.  The planned armament was supposed to be 420 cannons of all size, including 10 inch / 300 pounder rifled Parrotts and eventually 15 inch Rodman smoothbores.  It is surrounded by a moat and a moat wall.

It’s not in great shape.  A century and a half of wind, sun, water, and storms have eroded or rusted the walls both inside and out.  One of the building methods used iron framing for the bricks.  When the iron rusted and expanded, the bricks cracked and fell apart.  The maintenance work must have been endless and overwhelming even without any fighting going on.

I wandered the top at first, looking out across the Gulf of Mexico.  The water really is incredibly green and sparkling in a way I’m not used to at more dour northern beaches.  It just glows.  Some of the guns remain, in various states of upkeep.  Strangely, there’s also a range of antennas, including a Starlink, helping connect the park rangers who live there.  There are a couple of them, living in sections of the wall that have been built into studio apartments with the most impressive balconies you’ll find just about anywhere.  They have small boats and one larger one to patrol the area, and they’re armed and wearing body armor.  The area is visited often, apparently, by folks attempting to get into the US, either to live or smuggle drugs, and so the weapons are necessary if a bit disconcerting.

Inside the walls of the fort the atmosphere changes.  It’s dark and cool, the heavy bricks holding the temperature down to a quite reasonable level.  Dampness is omnipresent and so too are quick glimpses of the green water through cannon embrasures on the wall.  There are brick arches everywhere, the better to hold up the massive structure.

Outside are remnants of the living quarters, kitchens, and privies.  They’re mostly foundations with no real sense of the buildings that had been there.  The exceptions are the armory where they stored gunpowder and the furnace for heating shot.  The interior area is sun-beaten as well, and open to the elements.  I couldn’t imagine living there with no air-conditioning and regular hurricanes and storms.  There’s no place to really go but the fort.

Outside, you can walk almost all the way around on the moat wall.  This is quite amazing.  As you walk, away from the ferry and dock, you end up with just the wall and the ocean.  It’s quiet and peaceful.  You can snorkel and swim around the moat wall (not inside the moat) and I can imagine that would be even more other worldly.  I didn’t, as I didn’t want to deal with changing out of damp clothes.  Maybe I should have.

You have four hours before the ferry goes and I had finished wandering everywhere with about 90 minutes left.  I sat at one of the picnic tables in some shade and just watched:  the fort, the ocean, the people, the waves.  There’s no cell signal, so you just have to absorb what you can as you sit there.  Nothing to distract your attention from the scene around you.

Then, naturally, I went into the gift shop and brought myself a substantial amount of swag.  Included were stickers, a fridge magnet, and a key chain.  I know this is all highly consumerist but it becomes a living scrapbook that I carry with me and see daily, the experience of the day in a small square on my refrigerator door.  Most importantly, I got a stamp for my national parks passport book.  The day and date in a collection of experiences, stowed away until the next visit to a national park.

The ferry left at 3 pm.  There was a cash bar and a lot of the sickly passengers had medicated themselves against the trip back.  Thankfully for them, the waves were much easier this time, though some gift bags still got deployed.  We made it into Key West about 5:30 and I got off, having had a singular and unique experience.  The crew, which does the trip every day, set about cleaning the ferry.

### Top comments

- u/IndependentAd3170 (13): Nice description, but the snorkeling there is really awesome!
- u/capntail (7): I have done both the ferry and the seaplane. The seaplane has a half day and honestly it was worth every penny. Yea it about two times the cost of the ferry but when you're done with the fort all you want to do is get home and 30 minutes later you on the tarmac.
- u/Ofreo (5): I’ve always wanted to camp overnight there. You have to plan it probably close to a year in advance. It’s been a while since I looked into it. I should see about actually following through. I gotta think it’s pretty amazing to be there overnight. If you bring a kayak, you can paddle to the lighthouse too. 

I think the place was really cool to see. I had done a report on it in middle school, years before it was open as a national park. So when I finally got a chance to go, it felt like a life long dream.

## My One Week In KW!

So sad it’s over. I wanted to give my account of my one week in Key West, though. 

This was the first time I’ve ever seen blue water of that color. It was absolutely beautiful. I saw a wild sea turtle for the first time. 

Day one was simple. We landed at around 10:30 am. The airport is a small island airport which I believe is typical for islands like key west, granted that I’ve never been to one. It’s pretty simple. There’s one baggage claim, there’s one arrival lobby about the size of your average McDonald’s. Line for a rental car was insane but we got one just for the first day because we needed to get groceries and toiletries as we didn’t want to travel with them and we didn’t want to eat out all the time. We stayed at the condos at 1800 Atlantic. That complex has a pool area, a spa, saunas, a little rocky beach, and the most insane garden of tropical plants that I’ve ever seen. That entire experience was 100000/10, staying at that condo rental. 

The closest beach to us was Smathers and we took a walk down there to see the view, which was stunning. That night, we went to Duval St and I got a key lime shot from The Smallest Bar. The bartender was full of energy. We ate dinner at Frita’s. I wasn’t crazy about the Cuban sandwich but my family loved it. 

On the second day, the rental car was returned and we rented bikes from Green Hat Rentals for the rest of the week. I door dashed myself an iced cafe con leche from Cuban Coffee Queen and it was on point. I’m obsessed with the cafe con leche. Back to the bikes, I thought they were a great idea because the island is so small so why not? I will say that the bike riding was the most stressful part of being in Key West but it’s only because I am not used to riding bikes, I have horrible anxiety, and you always need to share the road with motorized vehicles unless there is a designated bike path. We biked from the condos to Fort Zachary and went to the beach there. The flags were up for windy, choppy conditions and jellyfish in the water. There was a snack bar located right on the beach which was super convenient because my water bottles were warm by the time we got to the beach. My sister and I took a swim in the water and it caught me off guard because the beach is actually made of fossilized sand and coral, which felt like you were stepping on little pebbles and rocks but it wasn’t painful. The water felt great. There were tons of birds and once again, the trees and greenery were so beautiful. We spent a few hours there before returning to the condo. We took a break and then went to Duval St again. For dinner, we had seafood boils at Stinkin’ Crawfish. There was live music and the dinner was absolutely delicious. I’ve never tried Florida pink shrimp before and it was different. We got ice cream at Mattheessen’s and it was nice and creamy. 

The following day, we booked a rise and reef snorkeling trip and left at around 9. They supplied goggles, snorkels, fins, and life vests but I opted to bring my own snorkel and mask because I am a germaphobe. The boat ride to the reef took about 45 minutes. We had one hour in the water and then a 45 minute ride back to the island where mimosas were served. I saw a ton of cool sea-life and the actual reef. It was the highlight of the trip. When we got back to the dock, we went to Schooner Wharf Bar. I had calamari and a pina colada. I haven’t had a bad pina colada the entire trip. Everything was delicious. We went back to the room for the rest of the day and hung out by the pool and made food in the room that night. 

The next day, we went to the aquarium near Mallory Square. It’s a small aquarium with a few interesting animals like sea turtles, sting rays, sharks, and crocodiles. There were tons of other fish too and they had a ton of live demos for guests. I originally had reservations for Louie’s Backyard, but since we spent a ton of money at Stinkin’ Crawfish, those reservations were cancelled, which I was fine with. We explored Mallory Square for a little while and went back to the room.

The following day, we took a bike ride along S Roosevelt Blvd to Lazy Dog for a kayaking trip. The bike ride was difficult because the wind was blowing against us, adding to the resistance of the bike. But the views were beautiful. Kayaking was fun. There were a ton of little mangrove tunnels in the salt ponds that we went through and you could see the bottom of the ponds, where you could witness sea life like fish, crabs, and jelly fish. After the trip, we went to the southernmost seaside bar for happy hour and had another amazing pina colada with excellent ocean views. I tried conch fritters from Sandy’s Cafe for the first time and wasn’t a fan, but my dad and sister loved them. We then spent the rest of the day by the pool and I took advantage of a quiet stretch of beach from the condo and along the nature preserve on Atlantic, where I made a ton of friends like hermit crabs, sea snails, pelicans, kingfishers, and iguanas. I thought I saw a plastic bag on the beach and was gonna go pick it up but it looked a little weird. I touched it with my shoe and it wasn’t really moving like a plastic bag would, if that makes sense. I used google lens and wouldn’t ya know it, I was staring at a Portuguese man-o-war for the first time in my life. Good thing I didn’t touch it! I let it be and kept going on my walk before returning to the room at sundown. 

The next day, we went to the butterfly museum and if there is anything you do in Key West, the butterfly museum must be it. It was such a surreal and magical experience. You basically walk through a large greenhouse full of butterflies, birds, turtles and flamingos, along with trees and flowering plants. I also saw where the conservatory was hatching butterflies and moths in a specialized nursery room. My favorites were the Luna moth and the paper kite butterfly. Afterwards, we went to see the mile zero sign for US-1 and then I had a lobster roll from DJ’s Clam Shack, which was delicious…so delicious that I returned to get two more that same day. I got tattoos at Mile Zero Tattoo. My artist was James, and he was phenomenal. He did great work and was very personable. Finally, we flew out the next day, ending the perfect vacation. 

Key takeaways? I didn’t see a single grumpy person. Everyone I met was happy which makes perfect sense because Key West is immaculate. All of our uber drivers were really nice. People watching is interesting