# Reddit: Traverse City, United States

Sources: /r/traversecity

## Short's Brewing &amp; Keen Plan a New Future for Logan's Landing

# By Beth Milligan | April 7, 2026

Short’s Brewing Company is finally coming to Traverse City. Its new home – the east side of Logan’s Landing on South Airport Road, which the company has jointly purchased with Keen Technical Solutions – will see millions in new investment pour into a site locals have long desired to see revitalized. *The Ticker* has an exclusive first look at the property plans, including a targeted spring 2027 opening for a new Short’s taproom with a riverside tiki bar.

Tim Pulliam of Keen Technical Solutions and Scott Newman-Bale of Short’s Brewing Company sat down to discuss the companies’ purchase of the site, a deal they finalized March 16. The partners now own the entire east side of Logan’s Landing, including the parking area. Short’s Brewing Company is planning to use about 10,000 square feet of the 16,000-square-foot site, including a 1,600-square-foot deck. Multiple existing tenants including Vince’s Jewelers will stay for now in the remaining space, with room to accommodate future new uses.

Vince Amroian, who owns the jewelry store, sold Logan’s Landing East to Keen and Short’s after owning it for over a decade. Multiple potential buyers have come and gone, but Amroian says it was “worth the wait” to make this particular deal.

“The right people bought it,” he says. “This is the best thing that’s ever happened to this property. We’re not going anywhere – we’ve signed a great lease and are looking forward to their endeavors here. We have the dream team now.”

Pulliam, who is [also developing the nearby Mill District property on Woodmere Avenue](https://www.traverseticker.com/news/developments-move-forward-in-boardman-lake-district/), is passionate about the placemaking potential around the Boardman Lake Loop Trail. Like other locals, he remembers the heyday of Logan’s Landing when businesses like Auntie Pasta’s drew big crowds on evenings and weekends. Pulliam started dreaming in recent years about bringing the property back to life.

On a recent bike ride, Pulliam brought Short’s founder Joe Short to Logan’s Landing and said, “Could you imagine a bar here on the river?” That set the wheels in motion. Newman-Bale says Short’s – which has been approached “twenty to thirty times” over the years to come to TC and once “heavily looked” at The Village at Grand Traverse Commons – saw a unique opportunity to do something “cool and exciting that could help shape the community.” In December, the partners “quickly” reached an agreement to purchase Logan’s Landing East, Newman-Bale says, with Pulliam estimating the timeline at just a few weeks.

With the property now secured, the partners are ready to take action. Newman-Bale says Short’s plans to develop a taproom with on-site brewing, food service, and indoor and outdoor seating that will include a riverside tiki deck that could potentially host live music and other events/entertainment. The combined indoor-outdoor space will be able to hold a few hundred people, he estimates. The taproom is targeted for a spring 2027 launch, with significant remodeling work planned for the fall and potential “pop-ups” occurring between now and next year’s opening, Newman-Bale says.

From there, there’s room for additional future uses/tenants to come online, potential expansion of the outdoor area, and improved connections with the west side of Logan’s Landing, which is under different ownership. The bridge connecting the two sides is in disrepair and blocked off to pedestrians, but Newman-Bale and Pulliam hope that could change in the future. “We hope we can create inspiration and collaboration for like-minded uses to occur across the river,” Pulliam says.

One of the major challenges with Logan’s Landing [has been that it’s grandfathered in as a nonconforming structure](https://www.traverseticker.com/news/a-new-dawn-for-logans-landing/) and thus faces restrictions on its redevelopment under today’s zoning code, including river setbacks. Those regulations have stopped other buyers from being able to come in and, for example, convert the site to luxury condos or a brand-new commercial development. However, Pulliam and Newman-Bale say the property can still be revitalized for those with the patience – and long-term vision – to work within the existing parameters.

“To do it in a way that’s sustainable and not just about immediately maximizing profit does take longer, but it has much more of a community feel in the end,” says Newman-Bale. Pulliam agrees. “The goal is just not to lose money,” he laughs. “If it’s something the community wants, that will be its success.”

The partners have met with Garfield Township officials and say they’re allowed to invest in updating the existing structure so long as they don’t change the site’s footprint. While Short’s and Keen generally can’t build up or out, they can rehabilitate the existing building. The partners plan to invest several million dollars over a multi-year period into updating the property, ranging from roof repairs to new paint to improving the deck.

Township Planning Director John Sych affirms that approach. The owners can “make improvements to keep (the property) in usable operation and maintain the buildings,” he says. Garfield Township could also offer potential “flexibility in dimensional standards in terms of the setback” for future growth through a planned unit development (PUD), or a zoning plan tailored to a specific property. A PUD generally gives developers more flexibility in exchange for offering community benefits on a site. Sych says the township would likely want to see “improvements along the riverfront” as part of the PUD and have the owners of both sides of Logan’s Landing covered in the plan so the property is developed “cohesively.”

The new development comes at a time when Garfield Township is [already studying the future of Logan’s Landing and the South Airport Road corridor](https://www.traverseticker.com/news/garfield-township-eyes-visioning-process-for-south-airport-road/). Township officials have long discussed the need to potentially raise South Airport Road – which sits in a floodplain near Logan’s Landing – and create some type of crossing that could restore a more natural flow to the Boardman River. There’s a “working group” looking at the area, Sych says, including partners like Grand Traverse County (which owns Medalie Park at Logan’s Landing) and businesses along the corridor. Both Newman-Bale and Pulliam say they’re excited to be part of an effort to bring new energy to Logan’s Landing and the Boardman Lake Loop Trail district.

“The goal is really to be a catalyst with this project and the Mill District project to create activation around the entire loop,” Pulliam says. “It’s such a beautiful natural area around the lake and has such a cool history in our town. We’re getting away from its old industrial roots toward something that’s more beneficial for the entire community.”

### Top comments

- u/btwsox (45): This is great. Logan’s Landing has been an eyesore and a waste of an ideal location for a long time. I just wish both sides had a single owner so there could be a unified vision for its redevelopment.
- u/DisastrousWrangler (34): Quibble all you want about "more alcohol" but this is honestly best case scenario for this building and site. I really want them to pull it off and succeed. It's such an iconic property, but needs some deep(ish) pockets with real roots in the community. This partnership seems to be exactly that!
- u/Charmin76 (9): Very cool. I knew something would happen there and I am glad to see Keen involved.
- u/TVCity- (9): Yes, I understand the "we don't need more beer!" argument. However if it's anything like their Bellaire spot, it'll have good food as well. So... a restaurant. Like what was there before, just better beer :) Can't wait to paddle up there, hang out on the deck, and have a snack.
- u/SuggestionNo3506 (8): I've been wanting a cool riverside bar with a music venue in that space for 14 years, since I moved here.

## Oryana Unionization and Management Discussion

Hello! This post may seem like I am rambling, worsened I am sure by the fact that I am much more of a lurker than poster on any platform, and for that I apologize. I have quite a lot to say. First off, this in no way is meant to get people to riot or boycott Oryana or take any action. This is simply to hopefully get change to take place where it will help friends, family, and anybody who is a member/owner. I will do my best to stay anonymous, and keep those I talk about anonymous as well. For those who are curious but don't wish to read this whole post, I understand completely so here is a TLDR:

* Oryana West union vote failed, and Oryana had a much heavier hand in that than any company should, especially a co-op.
* Oryana has moved so far from their core values of providing a healthy and cheap food alternative. Instead of providing food for the people because they care, they now do it for profit over anything else.
* One particular person in management, who will stay anonymous, has reacted to a union in such an insane way, I had to say *something*. The bottom of the post is my personal thoughts on it.

I wanted to write this up today as there was recently a vote to unionize Oryana West. From what I can tell, it was close but did not pass. I am unhappy with this outcome, but that's the way of democracy. The problem with democracy, is that many forces can influence a vote. We have seen this on a national scale in recent events, and it happens on a smaller level as well, such as a union vote. As a budding leftist, I have read too many stories and heard from friends and coworkers, new and old, about the companies fighting so hard against a union that they will spend more money on union busting than they would simply bettering the lives of the workers they have so much power over. It is despicable, no matter what the business is, which bothers me so much more to be writing this about a co-op. We have our weekends, paid time off, vacation time, 8 hour work days, work benefits, and more, all thanks to the brave union members of days past, who fought and even died in bloody gunfights to secure even less than that.

  
With my opening preamble out of the way, I want to move into the behavior of the management on Oryana. I did work there for a time, but have since left. I made good friends there, and given my ideological background, I asked if they could keep me up to date on what's going on with the potential union. I personally did not find too much issue with those who manage Oryana at the higher level. A thing here and there, sure, but that's normal to butt heads. We are all human after all. What I have seen from the management of a Co-op of ALL businesses is absolutely insane and their image has forever been ruined for me and those around me. I remember during initiation into the company learning the history of a collective of hippies, banding together to give their community cheap but healthy food. I was so happy and excited to be a part of this project. What I have seen from management, however, betrays any notion that this company cares for its workers or the community aside from the fact that they can earn money from the shoppers there.

  
A co-op is a business model where the owners are able to buy into the business to become one of the owners. The board that runs aspects of the business are democratically elected by any owners who wish to vote. A business for the community, ran by the community, at least in part. Oryana follows this structure, there is the board, and there is the actual management at each location. It's not entirely different than other companies, aside from the fact that instead of a bunch of rich guys, the people get to choose who makes the big decisions. Personally, I like this model, except for the fact that there is no spot reserved for any sort of worker. In fact, as I have seen in this subreddit on another post, there is someone running for the board who had to quit to be able to even run. Oryana does not seem to care about the fact that their employees are a part of the community that makes a co-op such a good business model. I am unaware whether the board itself knows every little detail of this whole situation. If they don't, I hope they will learn about it and take action. If they do know, and are in support of how this has played out, then I would hope the community replaces them in the next elections. 

  
This brings me into my biggest issue with Oryana West. The management and it's actions opposing a union. There have been some things here and there that I have personally taken issue with. Today I was told about some particular behaviors that happened recently and I simply count not stay quiet. After all, most people who shop there are owners, and the owners who buy into this and vote in the board elections deserve to know the in's and out's of the company they partly own. I only wish for the people to be able to make educated decisions. The image part of this post is a 'beautifully' written essay given to every employee via taping to their lockers and a poster sized version being hung up. From what I was told, this was not up for a very long time.

This last section will act as my argument against such writing being used to dissuade the workers from unionizing, as it is incredibly disappointing to me. I hope the person who wrote it will see this. If you do see this, I hope you read this and change. I am angry you would claim to hold such an ideological stance, only to rip it to shred within the very paper. I will be going through the paper and discussing different aspects mentioned.

  
My first and biggest issue with this is that this person claims to have a strong ideological stance being pro union and community building, and the entirety of that facade falls apart by the very fact that any sort of resistance to the union on the side of management. If you truly held this position, then you would have welcomed a union vote, maybe met with the organizers to see what could be improved, or changed. I may not have the years of being a morally consistent labor rights supporter, but I know damn well that **every** labor group should be unionized, even if they work for the nicest company on the planet. To use a belief so blatantly to endear those under you to your point, only to push for the exact opposite of what your own family would be for, is sickening.

My second issue is one of optics, you could say. Printing so many copies of this and taping them to every employees locker is not only childish and something I would only imagine from a crazy ex, it is straight up wasteful. It would be hilarious if it wasn't real. Is Oryana not a green company? Why would you print off so many copies of this already insanely pe