# Wikipedia: Indianapolis, United States

## Visual arts

Robert Indiana's LOVE at the Indianapolis Museum of Art in 2008
With a permanent collection of 54,000 works, the Indianapolis Museum of Art at Newfields is the city's primary art museum. It is among the largest and oldest art museums in the United States, tracing its roots back to the Art Association of Indianapolis, which was founded in 1883. The museum's 152-acre (62 ha) Newfields' campus includes Oldfields–Lilly House & Gardens and the Virginia B. Fairbanks Art & Nature Park.
Established in 1902, the Herron School of Art and Design's first core faculty included Impressionist painters belonging to the Hoosier Group. Eskenazi Hall at IU Indianapolis has been home to the school since 2005, hosting five public galleries and numerous programs throughout the year.
Located in Broad Ripple, the Indy Art Center houses the Marilyn K. Glick School of Art, galleries, and a sculpture garden. The center hosts and manages art classes, exhibitions, art fairs, and outreach programs throughout the year. The Harrison Center in the Old Northside and the Murphy Art Center in Fountain Square house several galleries and artist studios and participate in First Friday events.
Located in downtown Indianapolis, the Eiteljorg Museum is home to a diverse collection of visual arts by indigenous peoples of the Americas and Western American Art. The museum hosts numerous lectures, artist residencies, special exhibitions, and events annually.
In 2021, there were more than 3,000 recorded works of public art in Indianapolis. More than one-third of those are concentrated in the downtown Indianapolis area, including dozens belonging to the Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis Public Art Collection, the Indiana Statehouse Public Art Collection, or the Indianapolis Cultural Trail. Murals are the most popular medium of public art found in the city.
Since 2020, Ganggang has been a prominent supporter of Black artists in the city. Their annual art fair "BUTTER" is a multi-day art exhibition that takes place over Labor Day weekend.

## Performing arts

The Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra performing at Hilbert Circle Theatre in 2019
Madam Walker Legacy Center opened on Indiana Avenue in 1927 as a cultural center for the city's African American community.
Several of the city's most prominent performing arts venues and organizations are located in the downtown area, including the Hilbert Circle Theatre (home to the Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra) and the Indiana Theatre (home to the Indiana Repertory Theatre). Other notable venues near the central business district include The Cabaret, Indianapolis Artsgarden, Phoenix Theatre, Slippery Noodle Inn, and Everwise Amphitheater at White River State Park, the city's largest outdoor venue.
The Mass Ave Cultural Arts District is home to Old National Centre, the oldest stagehouse in Indianapolis, having opened in 1910. The performing arts center features the 2,500-seat Murat Theatre, the 2,000-seat Egyptian Room, and the 600-seat Corinthian Hall. Mass Ave is also home to the Athenæum, Basile, District, and IF theaters, all of which host the annual Indianapolis Theatre Fringe Festival, or "IndyFringe". Hedback Community Theatre in Herron–Morton is home to Footlite Musicals and Epilogue Players theater companies.
The Madam Walker Legacy Center opened in the heart of the city's African-American neighborhood on Indiana Avenue in 1927. The building's theater hosted vaudeville shows and anchored the Indiana Avenue jazz scene from the 1920s through the 1960s. "The Avenue" produced greats such as David Baker, Slide Hampton, Freddie Hubbard, J. J. Johnson, James Spaulding, and the Montgomery Brothers (Buddy, Monk, and Wes). Wes Montgomery is considered one of the most influential jazz guitarists of all time, and is credited with popularizing the "Naptown Sound".
Local performing arts organizations include the Indianapolis Baroque Orchestra, Indianapolis Chamber Orchestra, Indianapolis Men's Chorus, Indianapolis Opera, and Indianapolis Youth Orchestra. Other notable venues include Butler University's Clowes Memorial Hall and Melody Inn in Butler–Tarkington, and the Frank and Katrina Basile Opera Center and the Jazz Kitchen in Meridian–Kessler. The city's Broad Ripple and Fountain Square neighborhoods are known for local live music, home to dozens of venues.
Indianapolis is home to a variety of national professional musical organizations, including the American Piano Awards, Bands of America, Drum Corps International, and the Percussive Arts Society. Annual music festivals and competitions held in the city include the Drum Corps International World Class Championships, Indianapolis Early Music Festival, and Indy Jazz Fest. The quadrennial International Violin Competition of Indianapolis is considered among the most prestigious of its kind in the world.

## Literary arts

A mural memorializing Kurt Vonnegut on Mass Avenue, completed by local artist Pamela Bliss in 2011 
From about 1870 to 1920, Indianapolis was at the center of the Golden Age of Indiana Literature. Several notable poets and writers based in the city achieved national prominence and critical acclaim during this period, including James Whitcomb Riley, Booth Tarkington, and Meredith Nicholson. Perhaps the city's most acclaimed twentieth-century writer was Kurt Vonnegut, known for his darkly satirical and controversial bestselling novel Slaughterhouse-Five. Vonnegut became known for including at least one character in his novels from Indianapolis.
A key figure of the Black Arts Movement, Indianapolis resident Mari Evans was among the most influential of the twentieth century's black poets. Indianapolis is home to bestselling young adult fiction writer John Green, known for his critically acclaimed 2012 novel The Fault in Our Stars, set in the city. Notable sites in Indianapolis include the James Whitcomb Riley Museum Home, the Ray Bradbury Center at IU Indianapolis, and the Kurt Vonnegut Museum and Library.

## Attractions

See also: List of attractions and events in Indianapolis
"Bucky", a juvenile Tyrannosaurus specimen at the Children's Museum of Indianapolis in 2010
The Children's Museum of Indianapolis is the world's largest children's museum with 433,000 square feet (40,227.02 m2) of exhibit space and a collection of over 120,000 artifacts. Due to its leadership and innovations, the museum is a world leader in its field. In 2023, it was one of the region's most popular attractions, drawing about 1.2 million visitors.
The Indianapolis Zoo houses more than 1,400 animals of 235 species while the adjoining White River Gardens contains more than 50,000 plants of nearly 3,000 species, respectively. The zoo is a leader in animal conservation and research, recognized for its biennial Indianapolis Prize award. It is among the largest privately funded zoos in the U.S. and one of the city's most visited attractions, with 1.1 million guests in 2023.
Located inside the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, the Indianapolis Motor Speedway Museum exhibits an extensive collection of auto racing memorabilia showcasing various motorsports and automotive history. Daily grounds and track tours originate from the museum. Located at the National Collegiate Athletic Association headquarters, the NCAA Hall of Champions contains exhibits on collegiate athletics in the U.S.
The Benjamin Harrison Presidential Site includes the archives and restored home of the 23rd president of the U.S., Benjamin Harrison. Harrison is buried about 3 miles (4.8 km) north of the site at Crown Hill Cemetery. Other notable interments at the cemetery include three U.S. vice presidents (Fairbanks, Hendricks, and Marshall), notorious American gangster John Dillinger, and First Lady Caroline Harrison. State-specific historical institutions based in Indianapolis include the Indiana Historical Society, Indiana Humanities, the Indiana Jewish Historical Society, Indiana Landmarks, the Indiana Medical History Museum, and the Indiana State Museum.
The Indiana World War Memorial Historic District in downtown Indianapolis is home to more than a dozen memorials and monuments to United States veterans, including the national headquarters of the American Legion, the Indiana War Memorial Museum, and the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument. Combined, it is the largest war memorial project in the United States, encompassing 24 acres (9.7 ha). Other notable sites in the city include Crown Hill National Cemetery, the Indiana 9/11 Memorial, the Medal of Honor Memorial, and the USS Indianapolis National Memorial.

Indiana Farmers Coliseum during the 2015 Indiana State Fair
Indianapolis hosts numerous annual fairs, festivals, and parades. The largest is the Indiana State Fair, regularly drawing more than 800,000 attendees each August. Held during the "Month of May", the 500 Festival features over 30 programs and events leading up to the Indianapolis 500. Other notable events include the Indy Pride Festival and the Marion County Fair in June, the Indiana Black Expo Summer Celebration in July, the Historic Irvington Halloween Festival in October, and the Circle of Lights during the holiday season.

## Cuisine

Indianapolis City Market, founded in 1821
Indianapolis has an emerging food scene as well as established eateries. Founded in 1821 as the city's public market, the Indianapolis City Market has served the community from its current building since 1886. Before World War II, the City Market was home to meat and vegetable vendors. As consumer habits evolved and residents moved from the central city, City Market transitioned from a traditional marketplace to a food hall. The AMP and The Garage food halls opened in 2021.
Situated in the Corn Belt, Indianapolis has maintained close ties to farming and food production. Urban agriculture in the city dates to the 1930s, when Flanner House began teaching Black arrivals how to farm on vacant lots during the Great Migration. Within a few years, more than 200 families were tending 600 garden plots on nearly 100 acres (40 ha) of land on the city's near north side. Urban agriculture has made a comeback in recent years in an effort to alleviate food deserts. According to the city's Office of Sustainability, there were 129 community farms and gardens in 2020. As of 2020[update], several farmers' markets have been established throughout Indianapolis.
Distinctive local dishes include pork tenderloin sandwiches, sugar cream pie, and beef Manhattan, invented in Indianapolis. Wonder Bread and Choc-Ola also originate in the city. Longstanding local eateries include Long's Bakery, Mug-n-Bun, Shapiro's Deli, The Workingman's Friend, and St. Elmo Steak House. St. Elmo was recognized with the America's Classics award by the James Beard Foundation in 2012. In 2008, the Indianapolis metropolitan area had the highest concentration of chain restaurants per capita in the U.S. Locally based chains include MCL Restaurant & Bakery, Noble Roman's, and Steak 'n Shake. The city's growing immigrant population has contributed to a rise in global cuisine, with some 800 ethnic restaurants opening in recent years.
In 2016, Condé Nast Traveler named Indianapolis the "most underrated food city in the U.S.", while ranking Milktooth as one of the best restaurants in the world. Food & Wine called Indianapolis the "rising star of the Midwest". Several Indianapolis chefs and restaurateurs have been semifinalists in the James Beard Foundation Awards in recent years. Microbreweries have become a staple in the city, increasing fivefold since 2009. There are now about 50 craft brewers in Indianapolis, with Sun King Brewing being the largest.

## Motorsports

An open-wheel car crossing the Yard of Bricks during practice for the 2012 Indianapolis 500
Indianapolis is a global center for auto racing, home to numerous motorsports facilities and events, two sanctioning bodies (INDYCAR and United States Auto Club), and more than 500 motorsports-related companies. Indianapolis, or Indy, is a metonym for auto racing, particularly when referring to American open-wheel car racing.
Completed in 1909 as an automotive test track, the Indianapolis Motor Speedway is a National Historic Landmark and the world's largest sports venue by capacity, with 235,000 permanent seats. Since 1911, the 2.5-mile-long (4.0 km) rectangular oval has hosted the Indianapolis 500, an open-wheel automobile race. It is contested as part of the IndyCar Series and traditionally held over Memorial Day weekend. Steeped in tradition, the race is considered the world's largest single-day sporting event and part of the Triple Crown of Motorsport. The track also hosts the Grand Prix of Indianapolis in May and NASCAR's Brickyard 400 and Pennzoil 250 in July.
Lucas Oil Indianapolis Raceway Park (in nearby Brownsburg) contains a 2.5-mile-long (4.0 km) road course, a 4,400-foot-long (1,300 m) dragstrip, and a 0.69-mile-long (1.11 km) oval short track. Each Labor Day weekend, the facility hosts the NHRA U.S. Nationals, the largest and most prestigious drag racing event in the world. The city's Indianapolis Speedrome is believed to be the oldest operating figure 8 racing venue in the U.S.
