# Wikipedia: Jersey City, United States

## Neighborhoods

The city is divided into six wards.

Bergen-Lafayetteedit]
Liberty Island and Liberty State Park
Astor Place on Bergen Hill
Bergen-Lafayette, formerly Bergen City, New Jersey, lies between Greenville to the south and McGinley Square to the north, while bordering Liberty State Park and Downtown to the east and the West Side neighborhood to the west. Communipaw Avenue, Bergen Avenue, Martin Luther King Drive, and Ocean Avenue are main thoroughfares. Library Hall, built in 1866, served as the town hall for Bergen Township, then later as Bergen City, before its annexation. Library Hall has been preserved and is now a residential building. The former Jersey City Medical Center complex, a cluster of Art Deco buildings on a rise in the center of the city, has been converted into residential complexes called The Beacon. Completed in 2016 at a cost of $38 million, (~$48.5 million in 2024) Berry Lane Park is located along Garfield Avenue in the northern section of Bergen-Lafayette; covering 17.5 acres (7.1 ha), it is the largest municipal park in Jersey City. The Jersey City Municipal Complex opened in phases at Jackson Square in the Jackson Hill neighborhood from 2018 to 2023.

Downtown Jersey Cityedit]
Downtown Jersey City is the area from the Hudson River westward to the Newark Bay Extension of the New Jersey Turnpike (Interstate 78) and the New Jersey Palisades; it is also bounded by Hoboken to the north and Liberty State Park to the south.

Brownstones in Van Vorst Park neighborhood
Historic Downtown is an area of mostly low-rise buildings to the west of the waterfront that is highly desirable due to its proximity to local amenities and Manhattan. It includes the neighborhoods of Van Vorst Park and Hamilton Park, which are both square parks surrounded by brownstones. This historic downtown also includes Paulus Hook, the Village and Harsimus Cove neighborhoods. Newark Avenue & Grove Street, are the main thoroughfares in Downtown Jersey City, both have seen a lot of development and the surrounding neighborhoods have many stores and restaurants. The Grove Street PATH station has been renovated and made fully ADA compliant. and a number of new residential buildings are being built around the stop, including a 50-story building at 90 Columbus. Historic Downtown is home to many cultural attractions including the Jersey City Museum, the Hudson and Manhattan Railroad Powerhouse (planned to become a museum and artist housing), which gives its name to the Powerhouse Arts Warehouse District, and the Harsimus Stem Embankment along Sixth Street, which a citizens' movement is working to turn into public parkland that would be modeled after the High Line in Manhattan.
Newport and Exchange Place are redeveloped waterfront areas consisting mostly of residential towers, hotels and office buildings that are among the tallest buildings in the city. Newport is a planned mixed-use community, built on the old Erie Lackawanna Railway yards, made up of residential rental towers, condominiums, office buildings, a marina, schools, restaurants, hotels, Newport Centre Mall, a waterfront walkway, transportation facilities, and on-site parking for more than 15,000 vehicles. Newport had a hand in the renaissance of Jersey City although, before ground was broken, much of the downtown area had already begun a steady climb (much like Hoboken).

The Heightsedit]
Pershing Field entrance in The Heights
The Heights or Jersey City Heights is a district in the north end of Jersey City atop the New Jersey Palisades overlooking Hoboken to the east and Croxton in the Meadowlands to the west. Previously the city of Hudson City, The Heights was incorporated into Jersey City in 1869. The southern border of The Heights is generally considered to be north of Bergen Arches and the Covered Roadway, while Paterson Plank Road in Washington Park is its main northern boundary. Transfer Station is just over the city line. Its postal area ZIP Code is 07307. The Heights mostly contains two- and three-family houses and low rise apartment buildings, and is similar to North Hudson architectural style and neighborhood character.

Journal Squareedit]
Journal Square residential towers in 2024 
Journal Square is a mixed-use central business district. The square was created in 1923, creating a broad intersection with Hudson Boulevard which itself had been widened in 1908. Other major squares in the neighborhood are Bergen Square, India Square and Five Corners. McGinley Square is located in close proximity to Journal Square, and is considered an extension of it. The Journal Square Transportation Center is a major multi-modal transportation hub with a NJ Transit bus terminal and PATH station. It also houses the PATH Operations Center and a multilevel retail plaza. Hudson County Community College is located throughout the neighborhood. Journal Square is currently undergoing a massive wave of economic growth and development not seen since the neighborhood was first established with more than 4,400 residential units under construction.

Greenvilleedit]
Greenville is on the south end of Jersey City. In the 2010s, the neighborhood underwent a revitalization. Considered an affordable neighborhood in the New York City area, a number of Ultra-Orthodox Jews and young families purchased homes and built a substantial community there, attracted by housing that costs less than half of comparable homes in New York City. In a December 2019 shooting incident, three bystanders were killed in a kosher market in Greenville. The two assailants, who had earlier killed a police detective, were also shot and killed.

West Sideedit]
The West Side borders Greenville to the south and the Hackensack River to the west; it is also bounded to the east and north by Bergen-Lafayette and the broader Journal Square area, including McGinley Square. It consists of various diverse areas on both sides of West Side Avenue, one of Jersey City's leading shopping streets. The Hudson-Bergen Light Rail's (HBLR) West Side Avenue station serves the shopping district and surrounding neighborhood. The West Side is the home of New Jersey City University and Saint Peter's University. The Bayfront project is a planned 100-acre (0.40 km2) mixed-use development and community on a remediated former industrial brownfield site on the Hackensack River. When complete, it will feature 8,000 new housing units with 35% deemed affordable, 23-acre (0.093 km2) of open space, a new school, firehouse and a new HBLR station.

## Notable landmarks

Statue of Liberty
Main article: List of Registered Historic Places in Hudson County, New Jersey
See also: List of public art in Jersey City, New Jersey
Statue of Liberty National Monument, Ellis Island and Liberty Island (Liberty Island and part of Ellis Island are located in New York, but both islands are closer to the New Jersey shoreline.)
The Liberty Science Center, is a 300,000-square-foot (28,000 m2) science museum and learning center located in Liberty State Park.
The Peter Stuyvesant Monument by J. Massey Rhind is a memorial to Peter Stuyvesant and the establishment of settlement of Bergen, New Netherlands in 1660. Erected in 1910 to commemorate the 250th anniversary of the establishment of Bergen.
The Katyń Memorial by Polish-American artist Andrzej Pitynski on Exchange Place is the first memorial of its kind to be raised on American soil to honor the dead of the Katyń Forest Massacre.
The Lincoln the Mystic is a memorial honoring Abraham Lincoln by James Earle Fraser at the entrance to Lincoln Park.
Colgate Clock in 2009
The Colgate Clock, promoted by Colgate-Palmolive as the largest in the world, sits in Jersey City and faces Lower New York Bay and Lower Manhattan (it is clearly visible from Battery Park in lower Manhattan). The clock, which is 50 feet (15 m) in diameter with a minute hand weighing 2,200 pounds (1,000 kg), was erected in 1924 to replace a smaller one that was relocated to a plant in Jeffersonville, Indiana.
The Landmark Loew's Jersey Theatre, one of the five Loew's Wonder Theatres constructed in the 1920s and the only one located outside of New York City, is located in Journal Square. Currently presenting classic films, live performances, and events while the theatre undergoes restoration by volunteers.
The Van Wagenen House, also known as the "Apple Tree House". Built in 1740, it is one of the oldest structures in Jersey City and is the purported site of a meeting between George Washington and the Marquis de Lafayette in 1779 during the Revolutionary War. It is now home to the Museum of Jersey City History.
The White Eagle Hall is a renovated and re-opened historic theater. Constructed in 1910, it had served as the practice gym for the Saint Anthony High School Friars basketball program.
The Jersey City 9/11 Memorial erected to memorialize the 38 Jersey City residents that were killed during the September 11 attacks at the World Trade Center. The site of the memorial was a triage set up during the '9/11 boatlift' operation and afterwards became a staging area for rescue operations.
The Empty Sky memorial, designed by Jessica Jamroz and Frederic Schwartz, is located in Liberty State Park and honors the 746 New Jerseyans that were killed during the 1993 World Trade Center bombing and September 11 attacks.
The Statue of Mary McLeod Bethune designed by Alvin Petit who said "As a broader significance, this also plays a role in linking our City with a national movement to erect monuments that symbolize diversity and inclusiveness. This will be the first statue in Jersey City to honor the legacy of an African American woman."

## Art and culture

Based upon a 2011 survey of census data on the number of artists as a percentages of the population, The Atlantic magazine called Jersey City the 10th-most-artistic city in the United States. On November 3, 2020, Jersey City residents voted to create the Arts and Culture Trust Fund to provide 
funding for local arts organizations and artists and increased opportunities for youth arts education. The city became the first municipality in New Jersey to create a dedicated tax to support the arts. In 2023, Americans for the Arts released the Arts & Economic Prosperity 6 (AEP6) study on the nation's non-profit arts and culture sector. The study found that in 2022, Jersey City's arts and culture sector generated $46 million in economic activity while supporting 532 jobs, providing $28.2 million in personal income to residents and generating $7.1 million in local, state and federal tax revenue.

## Performing arts

The exterior of White Eagle Hall
White Eagle Hall is a 400-seat (800 general admission) performing arts venue located in the Village neighborhood of Downtown Jersey City. It first opened in 1910 as a performing arts venue and parish hall for St. Anthony of Padua Catholic Church. For many years after it was the practice gym of the historic national powerhouse St. Anthony High School Friars basketball team led by Hall of Fame Coach Bob Hurley. It reopened in 2017 after a three-year $6 million renovation as a performing arts, gallery space, and restaurant complex. Since 2017, the Jersey City Theater Center performs their dance and theatre programming at White Eagle Hall.

Loew's Jersey Theatre
The Loew's Jersey Theatre is a 3,500-seat historic movie palace and performing arts venue in the Journal Square neighborhood of Jersey City. It was built in 1929 and designed by the architectural firm of Rapp and Rapp. It is one of five Loew's Wonder Theatres in the New York metropolitan area and the only one built outside of New York City. When it opened it was called the "most lavish temple of music and entertainment" in New Jersey. In 2021, the theatre closed to undergo a $105 million renovation with a reopening scheduled for 2026 as a modern performing arts venue.
Monty Hall is a live performing arts space owned and operated by WFMU 91.1FM starting in 2014 at their offices and studios at 43 Montgomery Street.
Nimbus Arts Center at The Lively opened in 2020 in the Powerhouse Arts District (PAD) as the home for Nimbus Dance Works. At 15,000 sq ft (1,400 m2), the 150-seat performing arts venue hosts the organization's professional dance company, school of dance, performing arts presentations, visual arts program, and office headquarters. It is also home to Segunda Quimbamba and LUX Performing Arts.
Art House Productions Theater Center is located in the Powerhouse Arts District (PAD) and opened in 2023. The two-story facility, gallery and 99-seat black box theater was designed by nationally recognized theater architects Auerbach Consultants. The center hosts plays, comedy shows, film festivals, music performances, dance and visual arts.
The New Jersey Symphony is opening its first permanent venue in 2026 in the Powerhouse Arts District (PAD). The Symphony will be moving from its long time base of operations at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center (NJPAC) in Newark to a purpose built 550-seat theater called the "Symphony Center". The 44,000 sq ft (4,100 m2) Center will be a hub for concerts, classes and other activities. While the Symphony will continue to perform across New Jersey, the theater will serve as its primary location. The center will increase its programming over a five-year period, with about 20 to 30 performances in the 2026–27 season, and rising to about 150 to 200 performances in the 2030–31 season.
Several venues at the universities in Jersey City are also used to present professional and semi-professional theater, dance, and music. New Jersey City University (NJCU) features the historic 1,000 seat Margaret Williams Theatre at Hepburn Hall and the 120-seat black box West Side Theatre. Saint Peter's University features the 200-seat Roy Irving Theatre at Dinneen Hall and the 400-seat "cabaret-style" performing arts space at the Mac Mahon Student Center.

## Parks

Audubon Park in the Greenville
As of 2025, Jersey City has 109 parks total including municipal, county, state and federal park space with 12% of the city's land devoted to parks and recreation, compared to the national median of 15%, giving Jersey City the most park space of any city in New Jersey. Every Jersey City resident lives within a 10-minute walk of a park which is better than the national average of 57%.
In 2016, Jersey City residents voted to establish the Open Space Trust Fund to support the development and maintenance of open spaces, parks, and historic sites through a municipal tax levy. Additionally the trust fund has led to investments to improve open space access, acreage, equity and amenities. These efforts have led to Jersey City being ranked 31st out of the 100 most populous cities by the 2025 Trust for Public Land Park Score.
Among the parks in the city are Berry Lane Park at 17.5 acres (7.1 ha), the largest municipal park, and Lincoln Park at 273.4 acres (110.6 ha), the largest county park. Liberty State Park at 1,212 acres (490 ha) is the largest urban park in the state and the most visited state park with approximately 4.5 million visitors each year. The Statue of Liberty National Monument, which includes Ellis Island, is owned and operated by the National Park Service and is located in New York Harbor. Along the city's eastern waterfront is the Hudson River Waterfront Walkway, an 18.5 miles (29.8 km) linear park that runs from the George Washington Bridge to the Bayonne Bridge. The Hackensack River Greenway, is a 18-mile (29 km) walkway being developed along the county's western waterfront with completed segments at Droyer's Point, Lincoln Park, and Skyway Park.
