# Wikipedia: Madison, United States

## Neighborhoods

State Street connects Capitol Square to the University of Wisconsin campus.
Local identity varies throughout Madison, with over 120 officially recognized neighborhood associations. Historically, the north, east, and south sides were blue collar while the west side was white collar, and to a certain extent this remains true. Students dominate on the University of Wisconsin campus and to the east into downtown, while university faculty have been a major presence in the neighborhoods to its south and in Shorewood Hills to its west.
Capitol Square is Madison's central business district, featuring high-rise apartments, hotels, restaurants, shops, museums and the Wisconsin State Capitol. It hosts public events including the Dane County Farmers' Market, Concerts on the Square, and the Art Fair on the Square. State Street connects the University of Wisconsin campus to Capitol Square and is home to numerous bars and theaters. Langdon Street is another main road in the area, known for its fraternity and sorority houses.
The Dudgeon-Monroe neighborhood neighbors downtown Madison. It is located around Monroe Street, a commercial area which has local shops, coffee houses, dining and galleries and features Wingra Park, where people rent paddle boats and canoes at a boathouse on Lake Wingra. The Hilldale area comprises the Hill Farms-University neighborhood, Sunset Village neighborhood, and part of Shorewood Hills. The area contains Hilldale Shopping Center and a suburban setting.
The Marquette neighborhood sits on the near-east side of Madison and Williamson Street, its main thoroughfare, is known for locally owned shops and restaurants, including the Willy Street Co-op. Houses in the Marquette neighborhood are included in the Marquette Bungalows Historic District and Orton Park Historic District. The area is also the location of festivals like the Waterfront Festival, La Fete de Marquette, Orton Park Festival, and Willy Street Fair. The Williamson-Marquette area is a hub for Madison's bohemian culture, known for colorfully painted houses and murals.
Park Street, a diverse area in southern Madison, passes through several neighborhoods including Burr Oaks and Greenbush. It has been described as the "most racially and economically diverse area of Madison" and is home to ethnic restaurants and stores.

## Manufacturing and agriculture

The Madison metropolitan area is home to the headquarters or manufacturing of three notable bicycle brands: Trek, Mongoose, and Pacific Cycle. The area is home to the luxury appliance companies Sub-Zero & Wolf Appliance and Spectrum Brands (formerly Rayovac). Other advanced manufacturing and consumer goods companies headquartered in the area include American Girl, Lands' End, Shopbop, Colony Brands, and John Deere.
Supported by naturally fertile soil, Madison's infrastructure supports food production, processing, and distribution. Major employers include Hormel Foods, Del Monte, and Frito-Lay. The meat producer Oscar Mayer was a Madison fixture for decades, and was a family business for many years before being sold to Kraft Foods. Its Madison headquarters and manufacturing facility were shuttered in 2017.

## Attractions and museums

Thai sala at the Olbrich Botanical Gardens
The Memorial Union is a central gathering place on Lake Mendota. Memorial Union Terrace is home to uniquely designed "terrace chairs" with a sunburst design that have become a symbol of the city. The Memorial Union hosts concerts, plays, and comedy and is home to multiple restaurants and ice cream shops serving both the University of Wisconsin–Madison campus and the greater city.
Henry Vilas Zoo is a 28-acre (11 ha) public zoo owned by Dane County which receives over 750,000 visitors annually. It is one of ten remaining free zoos in North America.
Olbrich Botanical Gardens contains a 16-acre outdoor botanical garden and 10,000-square-foot conservatory. Founded in 1952 and named for its founder, Michael Olbrich, the gardens are owned and operated jointly by the City of Madison Parks and the non-profit Olbrich Botanical Society. Noteworthy is the Thai sala, a gift to the University of Wisconsin–Madison from the Thai Chapter of the Wisconsin Alumni Association and the government of Thailand through its king, Bhumibol Adulyadej. Next to Olbrich is the Garver Feed Mill, a former industrial mill that is now home to various restaurants, an event space, artisan markets, and an assortment of festivals.
Art museums include the University of Wisconsin–Madison's Chazen Museum of Art and the Madison Museum of Contemporary Art, which annually organizes the Art Fair on the Square. Madison also has independent art studios, galleries, and arts organizations, with events such as Art Fair Off the Square. Other museums include Wisconsin Historical Museum (run by the Wisconsin Historical Society), the Wisconsin Veterans Museum, the LR Ingersoll Physics Museum, and the Madison Children's Museum.

## Architecture

Monona Terrace convention center as seen from Lake Monona
Madison's architectural landmarks reflect a wide range of styles, ranging from the first Usonian house designed by modern architect Frank Lloyd Wright to imposing brutalist buildings on the campus of UW–Madison and art deco towers interspersed through the downtown. Some of the most prominent buildings on the skyline include the Beaux-Arts Wisconsin State Capitol, the Renaissance Revival University of Wisconsin Memorial Union, the Wright-designed Monona Terrace, and the postmodern Overture Center for the Arts designed by César Pelli.
The height of Madison's skyline is limited by a state law that restricts building heights in the downtown area. All buildings within one mile (1.6 km) of the Wisconsin State Capitol have to be less than 1,032.8 feet (314.8 m) above sea level to preserve the view of the building from most areas of the city. The State Capitol dome was modeled after the dome of the United States Capitol and was erected on the high point of the isthmus. Capitol Square is located in Madison's urban core.

The Jacobs First House is a UNESCO World Heritage Site
Madison is home to eight buildings by renowned Wisconsin-born architect Frank Lloyd Wright, more than any city outside the Chicago area. Wright, who spent much of his childhood in Madison and briefly attended the University of Wisconsin–Madison, worked from his Taliesin studio in nearby Spring Green. Notable designs in Madison include Monona Terrace, the city's lakefront convention center, and Wright's first Usonian house, the Herbert and Katherine Jacobs First House, which is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Other prominent prairie style and Usonian architects, including Louis Sullivan and Claude and Starck, also have notable works in the city. The Harold C. Bradley House, located in University Heights, was a 1908–1910 collaboration between Sullivan and George Grant Elmslie. Claude and Starck designed over 175 buildings in Madison, many still standing, such as Breese Stevens Field, Doty School (now condos), and many private residences.
Downtown Madison features numerous examples of art deco and art moderne styles. Notable examples include Quisling Terrace, with its rounded corners and terracing, and Tenney Plaza, distinguished by lake views, marble and brass lobby details, and vertical lines, marking the city's first steel-frame high-rise. The art deco State Office Building, the tallest office building in Madison, was built in 1931 and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The Orpheum Theater, also on the National Register, is located a block from the state capitol on State Street and is recognized as the city's best-surviving movie palace. The UW–Madison campus has numerous buildings in the brutalist style, including the George L. Mosse Humanities Building designed by Harry Weese and the Chazen Museum of Art.

## Cuisine

Dane County Farmers' Market is the largest producers-only farmers' market in the U.S., and is held every Saturday on Capitol Square in downtown Madison, Wisconsin since 1972.
Madison's cuisine is deeply influenced by its agricultural surroundings and ethnic history. The city's proximity to numerous dairy farms has made dairy a central element of its food culture, with notable cheesemakers like Uplands Cheese Company, Hooks Cheese Company, and Landmark Creamery contributing to local offerings. Popular dishes include cheese curds, often served fried or "squeaky," and hot and spicy cheese bread, made by some Madison bakeries and available at farmer's markets around the city. Morning Buns, a variety of sticky bun made with croissant dough, were invented in Madison at the former Ovens of Brittany restaurant by chef Odessa Piper.
Additionally, Madison's culinary scene is enriched by local produce, including cranberries, snap beans, and potatoes. On Saturday mornings in the summer, the Dane County Farmers' Market is held around Capitol Square, the largest producer-only farmers' market in the country. The city's farm-to-table culture is reflected in its many James Beard Award award-winning restaurants and gastropubs.
Madison is home to numerous Wisconsin-style supper clubs. An all-you-can-eat Friday night fish fry is particularly common at Wisconsin supper clubs, as are old fashioned cocktails. Some restaurants in Madison follow the general Wisconsin supper club practice of restaurants serving "Friday fish fry, Saturday prime rib special, Sunday chicken dinner special."
Madison's food culture also embraces its ethnic diversity. German immigrants introduced rich culinary traditions, influencing local restaurants and beer halls. Madison is also home to a large Hmong population, leading to a variety of Laotian and Hmong restaurants that make the city a "national hub of Hmong cuisine". The city offers unique foods such as the large spring rolls sold from the food carts on Capital Square and State Street, particularly in warmer months.
Madison is home to the food festivals, such as Brat Fest. The Great Taste of the Midwest craft beer festival, established in 1987 and the second-longest-running such event in North America, is held the second Saturday in August. The highly coveted tickets sell out within an hour of going on sale in May.

## Music

Concerts on the Square
Madison's music scene covers a spectrum of musical culture. Several venues offer live music nightly, ranging from Barrymore Theatre and High Noon Saloon on the east side to small coffee houses and wine bars. The biggest headliners sometimes perform at the Orpheum Theater, the Overture Center, Breese Stevens Field, the Alliant Energy Center, or the UW Theatre on campus. Other major rock and pop venues include the Majestic Theatre, the Sylvee, and the Bartell. During the summer, the Memorial Union Terrace on the University of Wisconsin campus, offers live music five nights a week. The Union is located on the shores of Lake Mendota.
In the summer, Madison hosts many music festivals. Concerts on the Square is a weekly Madison tradition during the summer. On Wednesday evenings, the Wisconsin Chamber Orchestra performs free concerts on the capitol's lawn, and spectators can listen to the music while picnicking on the grass. Other annual music events include the Waterfront Festival, the Willy Street Fair, Atwood Summerfest, the Isthmus Jazz Festival, the Orton Park Festival, 94.1 WJJO's Band Camp, Greekfest, the WORT Block Party and the Sugar Maple Traditional Music Festival, and the Madison World Music Festival. One of the latest additions is the La Fete de Marquette, taking place around Bastille Day at various east side locations and celebrating French music with Cajun influences. Madison also hosts an annual electronic music festival, Reverence, and the Folk Ball, a world music and Folk dance festival held annually in January. Madison also plays host to the National Women's Music Festival. UW-Madison also hosts the annual music and arts festival, Revelry, on campus at the Memorial Union each spring. The festival is put on by students for students as an end of the year celebration on campus.
The Madison Scouts Drum and Bugle Corps is a competitive drum corps group based in Madison that competes and tours across North America as part of Drum Corps International. The University of Wisconsin Marching Band performs at various local concerts and parades.
Madison has an independent rock scene, with local independent record labels including Crustacean Records, Science of Sound, Kind Turkey Records, and Art Paul Schlosser Inc. Madison was home to Smart Studios, Butch Vig and Steve Marker's longtime studio where many alternative rock records of the 1990s and 2000s were recorded and/or produced. A Dr. Demento and weekly live karaoke favorite is The Gomers. They have performed with fellow Wisconsin residents Les Paul and Steve Miller.
Madison is also home to notable artists such as Paul Kowert of Punch Brothers, Mama Digdown's Brass Band, Clyde Stubblefield of Funky Drummer and James Brown fame, and musicians Roscoe Mitchell, Richard Davis, Ben Sidran, Sexy Ester and the Pretty Mama Sisters, Reptile Palace Orchestra, Ted Park, DJ Pain 1, Killdozer, Zola Jesus, VO5, Caustic, Phox, Masked Intruder, and Lou & Peter Berryman, among others. The band Garbage formed in Madison in 1994, and has sold 17 million albums.

## Nightlife

Much of the city's nightlife is centralized to the downtown area which includes a variety of bars, restaurants, and performance venues. State Street and the surrounding area are popular with tourists and University of Wisconsin-Madison students. Venues in the Capital Square neighborhood are popular with local young professionals and provide many happy hour specials. Another center of nightlife is the Williamson (Willy) Street Neighborhood. Madison is also home to a number of nightclubs, gay bars and live music venues. The Mifflin Street Block Party and the Freakfest Halloween Party also attract thousands of partygoers.

## Performing arts

Overture Center for the Arts
The Madison Opera, the Madison Symphony Orchestra, Forward Theater Company, the Wisconsin Chamber Orchestra, and the Madison Ballet are some of the professional resident companies of the Overture Center for the Arts. The city is also home to a number of smaller performing arts organizations, including a group of theater companies that present in the Bartell Theatre, a former movie palace renovated into live theater spaces, and Opera for the Young, an opera company that performs for elementary school students across the Midwest. Music Theatre of Madison is a professional musical theater company that performs new and lesser-known musicals in a variety of venues. The Wisconsin Union Theater (a 1,300-seat theater) is home to seasonal attractions and is the main stage for Four Seasons Theatre, a community theater company specializing in musical theater, and other groups. The Young Shakespeare Players, a theater group for young people, performs uncut Shakespeare and George B. Shaw plays.
Community-based theater groups include Children's Theatre of Madison, Strollers Theatre, Madison Theatre Guild, the Mercury Players, and Broom Street Theater (which is no longer on Broom Street).
Madison has one comedy club, Comedy on State (which has hosted the Madison's Funniest Comic competition every year since 2010), owned by the Paras family. Madison has other options for more alternative humor, featuring several improv groups, such as Atlas Improv Company, Monkey Business Institute, and open mic nights.
Madison is home to a large entertainment industry archive at the Wisconsin Center for Film and Theater Research, part of the Wisconsin Historical Society.

## Parks and recreation

Madison has 6,431 acres (26.03 km2) of park space, which is 13.5% of the city's total area. Parks in the city include James Madison Park, which has views of Lake Mendota; Frank W. Hoyt Park, which is listed on the National Register of Historic Places; Garner Park, where the Madison Opera holds an "Opera in the Park" event; and Warner Park, which is home to the stadium for the Madison Mallards baseball team. Goodman Pool is Madison's public outdoor swimming pool.
The University of Wisconsin–Madison Arboretum manages 520 acres (210 ha) of remnant forests and prairies throughout Wisconsin. The 300-acre (1.2 km2) Lakeshore Nature Preserve preserves native species along the southern shore of Lake Mendota.
During the winter months, sports enthusiasts enjoy ice boating, ice skating, ice hockey, ice fishing, cross-country skiing, and snowkiting. During the rest of the year, outdoor recreation includes sailing on the local lakes, bicycling, and hiking.
Madison is known for its extensive biking infrastructure, with numerous bike paths and bike lanes throughout the city. Several of these bike paths connect to state trails, such as the Capital City State Trail, Military Ridge State Trail, and Badger State Trail. In addition to these bike paths, most city streets have designated bike lanes or are designated as bicycle boulevards, which give high priority to bicyclists. In 2015 Madison was awarded platinum level Bicycle Friendly Community designation from the League of American Bicyclists, one of only five cities in the US to receive this (highest) level.

 Brittingham Park on Monona Bay
