# Wikipedia: Minneapolis, United States

## Neighborhoods

Main article: Neighborhoods of Minneapolis
Cyclists on Midtown Greenway in Midtown Phillips, one of the 83 neighborhoods of Minneapolis
Minneapolis has 83 neighborhoods and 70 neighborhood organizations. In some cases, two or more neighborhoods act together under one organization.
Around 1990, the city set up the Neighborhood Revitalization Program (NRP), in which every one of the city's eighty-some neighborhoods participated. Funded for 20 years through 2011, with $400 million tax increment financing ($572 million in 2025), the program caught the eye of UN-Habitat, who considered it an example of best practices. Residents had a direct connection to government in NRP, whereby they proposed ideas appropriate for their area, and NRP reviewed the plans and provided implementation funds. 
The city's Neighborhood and Community Relations department took NRP's place in 2011 and is funded only by city revenue. In 2019, the city released the Neighborhoods 2020 program, which reworked neighborhood funding with an equity-focused lens. This reduced guaranteed funding, and several neighborhood organizations have since struggled with operations or merged with other neighborhoods due to decreased revenue. Base funding for every neighborhood organization increased in the 2024 city budget.
In 2018, the Minneapolis City Council approved the Minneapolis 2040 Comprehensive Plan, which resulted in a citywide end to single-family zoning. Slate reported that Minneapolis was the first major city in the US to make citywide such a revision in housing possibilities. At the time, 70 percent of residential land was zoned for detached, single-family homes, though many of those areas had "nonconforming" buildings with more housing units. City leaders sought to increase the supply of housing to create more affordable housing and to decrease the effects single-family zoning had caused on racial disparities and segregation. The Brookings Institution called it "a relatively rare example of success for the YIMBY agenda". From 2022 until 2024, the Minnesota Supreme Court, the US District Court, and the Minnesota Court of Appeals arrived at competing opinions, first shutting down the plan, and then securing its survival. Ultimately in 2024, the state legislature passed a bill approving the city's 2040 plan.

## Visual arts

The Minneapolis Institute of Art admission is free except for special exhibitions.
During the Gilded Age, the Walker Art Center began as a private art collection in the home of lumberman T. B. Walker, who extended free admission to the public. Around 1940, the center's focus shifted to modern and contemporary art. In partnership with the Minneapolis Park and Recreation Board, the Walker operates the adjacent Minneapolis Sculpture Garden, which has about forty sculptures on view year-round.
The Minneapolis Institute of Art (Mia) is located in south-central Minneapolis on the 10-acre (4 ha) former homestead of the Morrison family. McKim, Mead & White designed a vast complex meeting the ambitions of the founders for a cultural center with spaces for sculpture, an art school, and orchestra. One-seventh of their design was built and opened in 1915. Additions by other firms from 1928 to 2006 achieved much of the original scheme. Today the collection of more than 90,000 artworks spans six continents and about 5,000 years.
Frank Gehry designed Weisman Art Museum, which opened in 1993, for the University of Minnesota. A 2011 addition by Gehry doubled the size of the galleries. The Museum of Russian Art opened in a restored church in 2005, and it hosts a collection of 20th-century Russian art and special events. The Northeast Minneapolis Arts District hosts 400 independent artists and a center at the Northrup-King building, and it presents the Art-A-Whirl open studio tour every May.

## Theater and performing arts

Further information: List of theaters in Minnesota
The Guthrie Theater originated as an alternative to Broadway.
Minneapolis has hosted theatrical performances since the end of the American Civil War. Early theaters included Pence Opera House, the Academy of Music, Grand Opera House, Lyceum, and later the Metropolitan Opera House, which opened in 1894. Fifteen of the fifty-five Twin Cities theater companies counted in 2015 by Peg Guilfoyle had a physical site in Minneapolis. About half the remainder performed in variable spaces throughout the metropolitan area.
In his social history of American regional theater, Joseph Zeigler calls the Guthrie Theater the "granddaddy" of regional theater. Tyrone Guthrie founded the Guthrie in 1963 with an inventive thrust stage—a collaboration by Guthrie, designer Tanya Moiseiwitsch, and architect Ralph Rapson—jutting into the seats and surrounded by the audience on three sides. French architect Jean Nouvel designed a new Guthrie that opened in 2006 overlooking the Mississippi River. The design team reproduced the thrust stage with some alterations, and they added a proscenium stage and an experimental stage.
Minneapolis purchased and renovated the Orpheum, Shubert (now the Cowles Center for Dance and the Performing Arts), State, and Pantages theaters, vaudeville and film houses on Hennepin Avenue that are now used for concerts, plays, and performing arts. Every August, the Minnesota Fringe Festival hosts performances in venues across town. The May Day Parade is held in south Minneapolis each May.

## Music

Further information: Music of Minnesota
Prince studied at the Minnesota Dance Theatre through the Minneapolis Public Schools.
Minnesota Orchestra plays classical and popular music at Orchestra Hall under music director Thomas Søndergård. The orchestra won a 2014 Grammy for their recording of Sibelius's first and fourth symphonies and a 2004 Grammy for composer Dominick Argento with their recording of Casa Guidi. Minneapolis's opera companies include Minnesota Opera, the Gilbert & Sullivan Very Light Opera Company, and Really Spicy Opera.
Singer and multi-instrumentalist Prince was a child prodigy who was born in Minneapolis and lived in the area for most of his life. In an era of music scenes, 1980s Minneapolis was a hotbed for American underground rock alongside R&B, funk, and soul thanks to the nightclub First Avenue and musicians like Hüsker Dü, The Replacements, and Prince. The city hosts several other concert venues including the Cedar and the Dakota. The Armory, the Skyway Theatre, and the Uptown Theater have national management.

## Historical museums

Black Lives Matter mural (2020) organized by the Minnesota African American Heritage Museum and Gallery
Exhibits at Mill City Museum feature the city's history of flour milling. The Bakken, formerly known as the Bakken Library and Museum of Electricity in Life, shifted focus in 2016 from electricity and magnetism to invention and innovation, and in 2020 opened a new entrance on Bde Maka Ska. Hennepin History Museum is housed in a former mansion. Built of elaborate woodwork in 1875 and maintained today as a historic site, the little Minnehaha Depot was a stop on one of the first railroads built out of Minneapolis.
The American Swedish Institute occupies a former mansion on Park Avenue. The American Indian Cultural Corridor, about eight blocks on Franklin Avenue, houses All My Relatives Gallery. In 2013, the Somali Museum of Minnesota opened on Lake Street. The Minnesota African American Heritage Museum and Gallery was founded in 2018.

## Libraries and literary arts

Main article: Hennepin County Library
In 2008, the Minneapolis Public Library merged with the Hennepin County Library. Fifteen of the system's forty-one branches serve Minneapolis. The downtown Central Library, designed by César Pelli, opened in 2006. Seven special collections hold resources for researchers.
The nonprofit literary presses Coffee House Press, Graywolf Press, and Milkweed Editions are based in Minneapolis. The University of Minnesota Press publishes books, journals, and the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory. The Open Book facility houses The Loft Literary Center, Milkweed, and the Minnesota Center for Book Arts. Other Minneapolis publishers are 1517 Media, Button Poetry, and Lerner Publishing Group.

## Cuisine

Further information: Cuisine of the Midwestern United States § Minneapolis and Saint Paul
After the flight to the suburbs began in the 1950s, streetcar service ended citywide.
One of the largest urban food deserts in the US developed on the north side of Minneapolis, where as of mid-2017, 70,000 people had access to only two grocery stores. When Aldi closed in 2023, the area again became a food desert with two full-service grocers. The nonprofit Appetite for Change sought to improve the diet of residents, competing against an influx of fast-food stores, and by 2017 it administered ten gardens, sold produce in the mid-year months at West Broadway Farmers Market, supplied its restaurants, and gave away boxes of fresh produce. Appetite for Change closed its Minneapolis restaurant in 2023, opened a food truck, and received a grant from the Minnesota legislature to create a long-term home. West Broadway is one of twenty farmers markets and mini-markets operating in the city, and among them, four are open during winter.
Minneapolis-based individuals who have won the food industry James Beard Foundation Award include chef Gavin Kaysen, writer Dara Moskowitz Grumdahl, television personality Andrew Zimmern, and chef Sean Sherman, whose restaurant Owamni received James Beard's 2022 best new restaurant award. James Beard's best new restaurant of 2025 was Bûcheron.
Conceived in Minneapolis as a malted milkshake in candy form, the Milky Way bar of nougat, caramel, and chocolate was made in the North Loop neighborhood during the 1920s. Both purported originators of the Jucy Lucy burger—the 5-8 Club and Matt's Bar—have served it since the 1950s. East African cuisine arrived in Minneapolis with the wave of migrants from Somalia that started in the 1990s. The Herbivorous Butcher, described by CBS News as the "first vegan 'butcher' shop in the United States", opened in 2016.

## Sports

Main articles: Sports in Minneapolis–Saint Paul and Sports in Minnesota
Target CenterTarget FieldU.S. Bank Stadium
Minneapolis has four professional sports teams. The American football team Minnesota Vikings and the baseball team Minnesota Twins have played in the state since 1961. The Vikings were a National Football League expansion team, and the Twins were formed when the Washington Senators relocated to Minnesota. The Twins won the World Series in 1987 and 1991, and have played at Target Field since 2010. The Vikings played in the Super Bowl following the 1969, 1973, 1974, and 1976 seasons, losing all four games. 
The basketball team Minnesota Timberwolves returned National Basketball Association (NBA) basketball to Minneapolis in 1989, and were followed by Minnesota Lynx in 1999. Both basketball teams play in the Target Center. The Lynx were the most-successful Minnesota professional sports team and a dominant force in the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA), losing the 2024 finals and winning four WNBA championships from 2011 to 2017.
Minnesota Frost, the champion Professional Women's Hockey League team in 2024 and 2025, and the Minnesota Wild, a National Hockey League team, play at the Grand Casino Arena, and the Major League Soccer soccer team Minnesota United FC play at Allianz Field. Both venues are located in Saint Paul.
In addition to professional sports teams, Minneapolis hosts a majority of the Minnesota Golden Gophers' college sports teams of the University of Minnesota. As of 2026, the Minnesota Golden Gophers Spirit Squads have won 30 combined cheer and dance national championships. The Gophers football team plays at Huntington Bank Stadium and has won seven national championships. The Gophers women's ice hockey team is a six-time NCAA champion. The Gophers men's ice hockey team plays at 3M Arena at Mariucci, and won five NCAA championships. Both the Golden Gophers men's basketball and women's basketball teams play at Williams Arena.
The 1,700,000-square-foot (160,000 m2) U.S. Bank Stadium was built for the Vikings at a cost of $1.122 billion ($1.57 billion in 2025); of this, the state of Minnesota provided $348 million ($488 million in 2025), and the city of Minneapolis spent $150 million ($210 million in 2025). The stadium, which MPR News called "Minnesota's biggest-ever public works project", opened in 2016 with 66,000 seats, which was expanded to 70,000 for the 2018 Super Bowl. U.S. Bank Stadium also hosts indoor running and rollerblading nights. Minneapolis has two municipal golf courses and one private course. Each January, the U.S. Pond Hockey Championships are held on Lake Nokomis. The Twin Cities Marathon held in October is a Boston Marathon qualifier. The final weekend of the 2024 pond hockey championships was canceled due to above average temperatures, as was the 2023 marathon.

## Parks and recreation

Main article: Minneapolis Park and Recreation Board
Minnehaha Falls in the summer
Landscape architect Horace Cleveland's masterpiece is the Minneapolis park system. In the 1880s, he preserved geographical landmarks and linked them with boulevards and parkways. In their introduction to a modern reprint of Cleveland's treatise on landscape architecture, professors Daniel Nadenicek and Lance Neckar add that "Cleveland was successful in Minneapolis in great measure because he operated with kindred spirits" like William Watts Folwell and Charles M. Loring. In his book The American City: What Works, What Doesn't, Alexander Garvin wrote Minneapolis built "the best-located, best-financed, best-designed, and best-maintained public open space in America".
Cleveland lobbied for a park on the riverfront to include the city's other waterfall. In 1889, George A. Brackett arranged financing, and his associate Henry Brown paid the state to cover the condemnation of surrounding land. Minnehaha Park, containing the 53-foot (16 m) waterfall Minnehaha Falls, is one of Minnesota's first state parks. The falls became what historian Mary Lethert Wingerd calls a "civic emblem" that appears on products and in placenames.
The city's parks are governed and operated by the independent Minneapolis Park and Recreation Board park district. Beyond its network of 185 neighborhood parks, the park board owns the city's street trees. The board owns nearly all land that borders the city's waterfronts—thus the public owns the city's lakeshore property. The park board owns land outside the city limits including its largest park, Theodore Wirth Park—sitting west of downtown Minneapolis and partly in Golden Valley—which incorporates the Eloise Butler Wildflower Garden and Bird Sanctuary.

Canoeing on the Mississippi
As of 2020, approximately 15 percent of land in Minneapolis is parks, in accordance with the national median, and 98 percent of residents live within one-half mile (0.8 km) of a park. The city's Chain of Lakes extends through five lakes in southwest Minneapolis. The chain is connected by bicycle, running, and walking paths and is used for swimming, fishing, picnics, boating, ice skating, and other activities. A parkway for cars, a bikeway for riders, and a walkway for pedestrians run parallel along the 51-mile (82 km) route of the Grand Rounds National Scenic Byway. 
Parks are interlinked in many places, and the Mississippi National River and Recreation Area connects regional parks and visitor centers. Among walks and hikes running along the Mississippi River, the five-mile (8 km), hiking-only Winchell Trail offers views of and access to the Mississippi Gorge and a rustic hiking experience. The Minneapolis Aquatennial, a civic celebration of the "City of Lakes", is held each July.
Minneapolis's climate provides opportunities for winter activities such as ice fishing, snowshoeing, ice skating, cross-country skiing, and sledding at many parks and lakes. As of 2024, the park board maintained 43 outdoor ice rinks at 20 sites in winter.
