# Wikipedia: Roanoke, United States

## Neighborhoods

Main article: List of neighborhoods in Roanoke, Virginia
The Grandin Theatre located in Grandin Village
Roanoke is divided into 49 separate neighborhoods. The city has incorporated into its comprehensive plan the goal of developing these neighborhoods into "villages", each with their own village center, and with the downtown neighborhood acting as the village center for the city as a whole. The Raleigh Court neighborhood has been cited as a model for such development, consisting of a variety of residential settings located around Grandin Village, an active commercial hub anchored by the Grandin Theatre, the city's only surviving historic theater. That commercial district is one of the city's nine neighborhoods (or portions thereof) that have been listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

## Arts and culture

Serving as a hub for arts and culture in Southwest Virginia, Roanoke is home to several museums and cultural institutions in addition to being the host of several festivals, many centering around Elmwood Park in downtown Roanoke.

## Arts

The Berglund Performing Arts Theatre is a 2,150-seat venue within the larger Berglund Center complex. It regularly hosts concerts, touring Broadway theatre performances, stand-up comedy shows, and the Miss Virginia pageant. The city's first permanent artwork funded by the Percent for Art ordinance – a law stating that the city must set aside 1% of its capital improvements budget for the purchasing of public art – stands before the theater. Dedicated in 2008 to celebrate the city's 150th anniversary, the 30-foot (9.1 m) stainless steel sculpture, "In My Hands", is one of over 160 public works of art in Roanoke.

The Jefferson Center as it appeared in 2023. The Tudor Revival building opened as Jefferson High School in 1924.
The Jefferson Center is a former city high school that saw extensive renovation during the 1990s, turning it into a mixed-use building including office space for non-profits and city departments, event space for meetings and receptions, and the Shaftman Performance Hall, a 925-seat theatre created from the original high school's auditorium.
In 2006, the former Dumas Hotel was reopened as the Dumas Center for Artistic and Cultural Development. The center is located on Henry Street, which served as the commercial and cultural center of Roanoke's African-American community before a mid-20th century urban renewal project that saw much of the historic Gainsboro neighborhood razed or relocated. The Dumas Hotel hosted such guests as Louis Armstrong, Ethel Waters, Count Basie, Duke Ellington and Nat King Cole when they performed in Roanoke. The renovated Dumas Center features an auditorium with more than 200 seats, and the building is a contributing structure to the Henry Street Historic District, listed in 2004 to the National Register of Historic Places.
Since 1964, the Roanoke Valley has hosted performances by the Mill Mountain Theatre, a regional theatre that has been located in Center in the Square since its original home atop Mill Mountain burned down in 1976. The theatre has both a main stage for mainstream performances and a smaller black box theatre called Waldron Stage, which hosts both newer and more experimental plays along with other live events.
Roanoke has been home to the Showtimers Community Theatre since 1951, and since 2008, the Virginia Children's Theatre has presented shows aimed at a younger audience, often based on children's literature. Originally formed as Roanoke Children's Theatre and housed in the Taubman Museum at that building's opening, the theatre expanded into the Dumas Center in 2013, and in 2016 moved to its current home in the Jefferson Center.
Opera Roanoke is Southwest Virginia's only professional opera company, established in 1976 as the Southwest Virginia Opera Society. It has performed under its current name since 1991, and its official orchestra since 2004 has been the Roanoke Symphony Orchestra. That group was established in 1953. The orchestra performs out of the Berglund Performing Arts Theatre, Salem Civic Center, and Shaftman Performance Hall at Jefferson Center.

## Points of interest

Roanoke is the largest metropolitan area on the Blue Ridge Parkway, a 469-mile-long scenic road that is the most-visited element of the National Park System. The Mill Mountain Parkway exit off of the Blue Ridge Parkway leads to the Roanoke Star, an 88.5-foot-tall (27.0 m) illuminated star sitting atop a mountain inside the city's limits. Also on the mountain's summit is Mill Mountain Zoo, a Zoological Association of America-accredited facility housing over 170 animals.

The Texas Tavern has changed little since its establishment in 1930.
The Basilica of St. Andrew rests on a hill overlooking downtown and has been called "one of Virginia's foremost examples of the High Victorian Gothic". The church dates to 1900, and was listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) in 1973. Just below the church lies the Hotel Roanoke, a historic 330-room Tudor Revival hotel originally built by the Norfolk and Western Railway in 1882 and rebuilt and expanded many times since. Nicknamed the "Grand Old Lady", the hotel was listed on the NRHP in 1995.
A pedestrian bridge leads from the Hotel Roanoke to the city's historic market building and farmers' market, the latter of which dates to 1882 and is the oldest continuously operating open-air market in Virginia. Near the terminus of the market is Fire Station No. 1, which for a time was the oldest continuously operating station in the state. The Georgian Revival structure was listed on the NRHP in 1973, and currently houses a local furniture showroom, restaurant, and boutique hotel. Two blocks west on the same street is Texas Tavern, an "iconic" ten-seat greasy spoon restaurant that the same family has operated since its establishment in 1930.

## Sports

The 1971–1972 Virginia Squires of the American Basketball Association were the only major league sports team to play home games in Roanoke regularly. During that season, the Squires split home games between Richmond, Norfolk, Hampton Roads and Roanoke. Julius Erving played his professional rookie season with the Squires that year before being sent to the New York Nets.

The Blue Ridge Mountains viewed from Salem Memorial Ballpark
Minor league baseball has had a long history in the Roanoke Valley. In the 1940s and early 1950s, Roanoke was home to a class B farm team of the Boston Red Sox. Since 1955, neighboring Salem has hosted the local minor league baseball team, which as of 2023[update] is the Salem Red Sox of the Low-A Carolina League. The team had previously been affiliated with the Houston Astros and Colorado Rockies and known as the Avalanche until becoming an affiliate of the Boston Red Sox, whose ownership group purchased the Avalanche after the 2007 season.
The history of minor league hockey in the Roanoke Valley goes back to 1967. The Roanoke Express of the ECHL built a loyal following in the mid-1990s, but a combination of financial turmoil due to mismanagement and declining attendance from a lack of post-season success led to the ECHL ending their franchise in 2004. An attempt at a revival in 2005–06 by the UHL's Roanoke Valley Vipers failed after one season. In 2016, professional ice hockey returned to Roanoke after ten years when the Roanoke Rail Yard Dawgs of the SPHL began to play, and the team won its first-ever President's Cup title in 2023.
While the Roanoke area is not home to any NCAA Division I schools, its proximity to Virginia Tech has led it to host some collegiate athletic events. Beginning in 1977, Roanoke, along with Richmond, was one of the primary neutral sites for the annual basketball game between Virginia Tech and the Virginia Cavaliers. In 2000 the schools started holding these games in campus facilities.
From 1913, Roanoke played host to an annual football game between Virginia Tech and the Virginia Military Institute, first at Maher Field and then in the newly constructed Victory Stadium starting in 1942. The game was moved to Thanksgiving Day beginning in the early 1920s and was a holiday mainstay in the city until 1971.
Roanoke's location among the Blue Ridge Mountains makes it a destination for other sporting events. Every year since 2010 (barring 2020, when it was held virtually due to the COVID-19 pandemic), the Roanoke Outside Foundation has put on the Blue Ridge Marathon, which is regarded as difficult due to its considerable elevation changes. The USA Cycling Amateur Road National Championships were held in the city and surrounding areas in 2022 and 2023, and an Ironman 70.3 triathlon event brought competitors to the region from 2021–2023.

## Parks and recreation

There are 60 parks within Roanoke's city limits, and its parks and recreation department is responsible for nearly 14,000 acres of public land. Highland Park in the historic Old Southwest neighborhood is the city's oldest, having been purchased in 1902 when the former farm was still distant from the settled part of the city.: 370  Elmwood Park in downtown Roanoke became the city's second in 1911.: 370  It features a Japanese magnolia tree that was acquired by Commodore Matthew Perry during an expedition to Japan and donated in 1857 to the former owner of the park. As of 2023[update] Elmwood holds the city's main library branch as well as an art walk and a 4,000-seat amphitheater.
Roanoke features an extensive network of paved greenways for walkers, runners, and cyclists. Though the idea for a publicly owned greenway system can be traced back to a 1907 comprehensive plan for the city, it was not until 1995 that an intergovernmental committee was formed to plan and develop the project. Since that time, 26 miles (42 km) of greenways have been built across the Roanoke Valley. As of 2023,[update] the longest continuous stretch runs 12 miles (19 km) along the Roanoke River from Salem through Roanoke City to Vinton. Roanoke County is also in the planning stages of extending that same stretch westward into Montgomery County. As of 2023,[update] Roanoke contained over 100 miles (160 km) of trails and greenways.
