# Wikipedia: Sioux Falls, United States

## Arts

Replica of Michelangelo's Moses at Augustana University
At the beginning of the 21st century, Sioux Falls experienced a renaissance of cultural interest. The Sioux Empire Arts Council continues to lead in the Sioux Falls area arts scene and gives out Mayor's Awards each year in several categories for excellence demonstrated by Sioux Falls residents. The Sioux Falls SculptureWalk was the first visual evidence of the renaissance and is an attraction for both visitors and resident artists, hosting over 55 sculptures, including a replica of the Michelangelo's David. Work was essential to the renovation of the original Washington High School into the Washington Pavilion (housing two performing arts, a visual arts, and a science center).
The Northern Plains Indian Art Market (NPIAM) was established in 1988 by American Indian Services, Inc., of Sioux Falls as the Northern Plains Tribal Arts Show (NPTA). Northern Plains Tribal Arts dominated the Sioux Falls art scene from its inception in 1988. American Indian Services produced the juried art show and market from 1988 to 2003. Since 2004, Sinte Gleca University of Rosebud has been the producing organization. In the first 25 years of its existence—one of the longest-running Indian art shows in the country—over 800 artists from 7 northern plains states and two Canadian provinces exhibited at NPTA/NPIAM. Writers for national publications, filmmakers, and researchers have all joined the audiences over the years.
A permanent Northern Plains Tribal Arts collection is housed in the Egger Gallery at the Washington Pavilion. Since the Washington Pavilion opened its doors to the public in 1999, the collection has called the Visual Arts Center home. Originally the pieces were on an extended loan from American Indian Services, Inc.; in 2013, thanks to many supporters, the works were acquired under the title of the Augustana Tribal Arts Collection, and now officially belong to the Visual Arts Center.
As the 21st century began, poetry and literary events became more popular with the opening of the Sioux Empire Arts Council Horse Barn Gallery and due to a National Endowment for the Arts-supported Y Writer's Voice. The Y Writer's Voice included an annual reading series of 38 nationally known poets and writers, who performed works and youth workshops through the Sioux Falls Writers Voice in local performance spaces, at the YMCA after-school program, and in local schools, gaining national attention.

Washington Pavilion of Arts and Science
The Sioux Falls mayor's awards in literary arts designated movers and shakers during the growth and development of the literary arts scene. In addition to literary awards, there are mayor's awards in visual arts, performing arts, music, organizing in the arts, advocacy, and lifetime achievement, per the mayor's discretion.
The Sioux Falls Jazz and Blues Festival was a three-day outdoor musical event featuring two stages and is free to the public. It was held the third weekend in July at Yankton Trail Park. The Sioux Falls Jazz & Blues Society hosted national musicians during its annual concert series. Each year the series included approximately five concerts with acts from all over the world. JazzFest, with over 125,000 in annual attendance, expanded over the years to include the Jazziest Diversity Project, the All-City Jazz Ensemble, the Concert Series, and JazzFest Jazz Camp. 2016 was the festival's 25th anniversary year. The SF Jazz and Blues Society (the hosts of the event) dissolved in 2023.
In 2019, Levitt at the Falls launched its first season of free concerts in a state-of-the-art outdoor amphitheater in Falls Park West. Downtown Sioux Falls boasts Ipso Gallery. the Orpheum Theater, SculptureWalk, The Premiere Playhouse, The Good Night Theatre Collective, Sioux Falls State Theater, the Museum of Visual Materials, the Interactive Water Fountain, Falls Park, Creative Spirits, Eastbank Art Gallery, Levitt at the Falls, and the Washington Pavilion, home to the South Dakota Symphony Orchestra, the occasional Poets & Painters show, and the Spotlight Theatre Collective (formerly known as the Dakota Academy of Performing Arts.)

## Landmarks

Replica of Michelangelo's David in Fawick Park
The Washington Pavilion contains the Kirby Science Discovery Center and two performing arts centers that host Broadway productions and operas. The South Dakota Symphony's home hosts dance groups and smaller theater and choral events. The Visual Arts Center, also part of the Pavilion complex, hosts six galleries of changing exhibits, all free of charge. The Wells Fargo Cinedome is a multi-format 60 ft (18 m) dome theater that plays several films each month. The Cinedome also hosts the Sweetman Planetarium, which presents at least one show daily.
The Great Plains Zoo & Delbridge Museum provides the area with natural history and animal exhibits in its 50-acre (200,000 m2) park. The taxidermy animals once hosted within the Delbridge Museum were removed in 2023 due to health concerns of the high amounts of arsenic in the mounts.
The USS South Dakota Battleship Memorial to the World War II battleship USS South Dakota is on State Highway 42 (West 12th Street) and Kiwanis Avenue.
The 114th Fighter Wing is at Joe Foss Field and houses F-16C/D fighter aircraft. The SDANG unit is known for its support of community activities and services.
A replica of Michelangelo's David is near the downtown area at Fawick Park.
